---
layout:	"post"
categories:	"blog"
title:	"How to apply Single Responsibility Principle in Swift"
date:	2018-02-24
thumbnail:	/img/1*kSM1k05nq77ron-DjBX_FA.png
author:	
---

* * *

![](/img/1*kSM1k05nq77ron-DjBX_FA.png)

Sometimes, when we are learning how to code, it's difficult to understand the
classes responsibilities concept. That's the reason because our first projects
become unmaintainable, containing many lines by class in our code and, much
more critical, many amount of responsibilities.

A good way to really know the responsibility for a class is thinking in
**scalability.**

Let's see an example of how to use that. But before I would like to introduce
a bit of theory and explain why this concept is important in software design.

### Introduction to Single Responsibility Principle

The idea of each class having a single responsibility in a software project,
and that responsibility being encapsulated in one unique class has a name:
[Single Responsibility
Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle)

This is one of the 5 main principles of software design
[SOLID](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SOLID_%28object-oriented_design%29)
where, in [Object Oriented Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object-
oriented_programming), they try to define a guide to have a more
understandable, flexible and maintainable software.

These principles are:

  *  _Single responsibility principle_
  *  _Open/closed principle_
  *  _Liskov substitution principle_
  *  _Interface segregation principle_
  *  _Dependency inversion principle_

The author of these concepts, [Robert C.
Martin,](https://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_C._Martin) (he wrote one of the
most important books in software architecture, [Clean
Code)](http://blog.cleancoder.com/) talks about _" A class should have only
one reason to change"_, so he defines a responsibility as a _reason to
change._

For instance, let's consider a module that compiles and prints a report.
Imagine such a module can be changed for two reasons. First, the content of
the report could change. Second, the format of the report could change. These
two things change for very different causes; one substantive, and one
cosmetic.

The Single Responsibility Principle says that these two aspects of the problem
are really two separate responsibilities, and should therefore be in separate
classes or modules. It would be a bad design to couple two things that change
for different reasons at different times.

The reason it is important to keep a class focused on a single concern is that
it makes the class more robust. Continuing with the foregoing example, if
there is a change to the report compilation process, there is greater danger
that the printing code will break if it is part of the same class. _(Example
extracted from_[
_Wikipedia_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle)
_)_

### Why is it important to define correctly each class responsibility

If we define our classes knowing which is their responsibility in our project
we can:

  * Easily understand which functionality it does in each part of the code.
  * Modify existent logic faster and in detail.
  * Find with less problems the origin of the bugs or unwanted behaviours.
  * Abstract logic in different classes or modules.
  * Split without major problems implementations so they can be completely replaced later.
  * Define unit tests by class or module in a more efficient way, so we can test a little piece of the code, and no more that we really want to test.

### Thinking in the scability to define responsibilities

As I said before, you can think in the classes scability to define
responsibilities. This is as simple as thinking if in our project might happen
that the requirements will be modified, and look in our architecture how these
modifications would take place.

If we see that for a small view change we have to modify or touch business
logic, we are not correctly defining the responsibilities in our project, for
instance.

Let's see a concrete example in Swift.

### Swift example

Let's say that I have an app which it shows a list of items from a store. By
now I only have a `ItemsViewController` which is in charge of all the logic of
that flow, the data and the presentation of that. Also, it prints a log when
the user selects an item.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/fedejordan/b8554027600bbf5f9a64dd623dae2344.js"></script>
![](/img/1*1Dq-bIVc5p8z3t_jLXb5Sw.png)

ItemsViewController: A simple list of items

You can see the code in <https://github.com/fedejordan/SRPExample>

To do that, `ItemsViewController` uses a `UITableView` to show the items in a
list. Also we're using a `UITableViewCell` subclass called `ItemTableViewCell`
to show these elements.

But let's say that we want to change the view, for instance, with a
`UICollectionView.` What would be the problem in this situation?

 **The view code is very coupled to the items data logic.** If we change the
view it 's very likely that we'll modify the class in charge of the items as
well.

The real problem is in these lines:

    
    
    let item = items[indexPath.row]

What is the problem here?

Because we are using the `UITableView` index to get the specific item in the
array. We should abstract in some way that the view uses an`UITableView`.

To avoid that, we'll **refactor** `ItemsViewController` and we'll move the
model logic to another class called `ItemsInteractor`.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/fedejordan/bc73b4a65d0e58e87017e563155737e8.js"></script><script src="https://gist.github.com/fedejordan/9834e4c93d44671ec757eeef29ec2127.js"></script>
The interactor concept has its origin in [VIPER](https://www.objc.io/issues/13-architecture/viper/) architecture. As it is said in the definition, an Interactor contains the business logic to manipulate model objects (Entities) to carry out a specific task. In this case, our` ItemsInteractor` is in charge of retrieving information about any` Item.`

You can get this code in <https://github.com/fedejordan/SRPExample>, in the
branch `interactor_refactor`.

As we can see, `ItemsViewController` doesn't know anything about the data
model. It simply ask the Interactor what it needs to draw the view.

With this approach we can, for example, change the data type `Item` for any
other thing, and we would only change `ItemsInteractor`. It would retrieve the
same information (we wouldn't change the public methods) and finally
`ItemsViewController` could keep working as always.

So, with that refactor, if we want to change just the layout of our app, we
simply change `ItemsViewController` to use an`UICollectionView`:

<script src="https://gist.github.com/fedejordan/584acb600bc660a2cf220a79c4c7754d.js"></script>
![](/img/1*NexoB1dLm11FnxD04W3l6Q.png)

ItemsViewController screenshot, using a UICollectionView

You can see the final result in <https://github.com/fedejordan/SRPExample> ,
`collection_view_refactor` branch.

Did we change something in `ItemsInteractor`? Just nothing. We simply changed
the presentation of the feature.

This, also, allow us to test all in a more modularized way. We can first start
to [test the view](https://medium.com/@federicojordn/how-to-do-ui-testing-in-
ios-with-fbsnapshottestcase-caea27e3d5f4), and then the business logic. Of
course that, for doing tests correctly, we need to do something more
injectable, se we can initialize the modules with mocked classes and we depend
of interfaces or `protocols` in Swift. Basically it means, for instance, not
creating the `ItemsInteractor` inside `ItemsViewController`, because it's an
dependency, and it should be abstracted from its implementation. But all of
this exceeds the article purpose.

### Conclusion

Seems that we didn't do so much work. We simply removed the view logic from
the data model. Was it really worth it? In this example, maybe it wasn't too
useful, in fact, could be that we simply need a list and nothing else.

But when we have more complex UIs, we have to adapt the same view to different
data sources, or share the data model with different flows. Applying this
concept allow us to reuse the code and scale the project in a more proper way.
And to do that, it's important to understand which responsibility should have
each class that we maintain.

I would like to add that, in my opinion, this concept is a necessary condition
to have a good code. In fact, in any code that is badly written, we will
always find any class with more than one responsibility. It's because of that
we saw the importance of Single Responsibility Principle.

Our Swift example allowed us to understand why it's important to define
correctly the responsibilities. How a correct modularized architecture can be
the key in the scability of our project, simply because we want to do a layout
change.

As a summary I would like to conclude that, looking always in our project
**scability** , we will be able to see if we are correctly defining our
classes or modules responsibilities.

Thank you very much for reading the post!

I hope you enjoyed it. You can send any message or suggestion about the topics
in the comments section, or simply sending me a mail to fedejordan99@gmail.com

